Proverbs chapter 2 verse 1 and it reads as follows, My son, if thou will receive my words and hide my commandments with thee, so that thou incline thy ear to wisdom and apply thy heart to understanding.
Yea, if thou cryest after knowledge and lifted up thy voice for understanding, if thou seeketh her as silver and searchest for her as hid treasures, then thou shalt understand the fear of the Lord and find the knowledge of God.
For the Lord giveth wisdom out of his mouth, cometh knowledge and understanding.
He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous.
He is a buckler to them that walk uprightly.
He keepeth the path of judgment and preserveeth the way of his saints.
Then shalt thou understand righteousness and judgment and equity, yea, every good path.
When wisdom entereth into thine heart and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul,
Discretion shall preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee.
Let's pray.
Dear God, thank you for your word, the Bible, that we have it to learn from, that we have it to guide our lives, that your wisdom is made known to us, that your knowledge is made known to us.
Be with us this Sunday as we hear your words and we get ready to learn your words.
And be with me as I try my best to teach your words.
And pray these things in Jesus' name, amen.
So believe it or not, and it was in the news a lot the past week,
We hit the one year pandemic anniversary, so to speak.
Although we do know the pandemic went on even before March, but I think March 2020 was when it became real to all of us, right?
And I was checking the records.
It's almost one year, almost one year.
It'll be one year next week, right?
The one year ago that I stood up here and I said something I think that I would have never thought I would ever say, which was one year ago I came here and said, don't come to church, right?
That was, you know, ridiculous.
Like, why would any speaker ever say something like that, right?
That was a year ago, because after decades of hearing people like Melvin say, hey, even if you're sick, you're not that sick that you can't make it, right?
That was the one time we had to say, hey, guess what?
If you're sick, actually, it's not a good time to come to church, right?
And it was weird, right?
And for the past year, it has been weird, right?
It's been different.
And I think we've learned a lot and seen a lot of different things over the past year from March 2020 all the way now to March 2021.
I certainly feel like I've learned a lot of stuff and I've realized a lot of stuff about myself, right?
I had to learn a lot of stuff technology wise, right?
That I didn't know before.
There's a lot of stuff.
remote working things and all that kind of stuff that I didn't have to deal with before and not have to learn and get expertise at that.
Staying home a whole year forced me to learn a lot of other skills and different things that maybe I wasn't so good at before.
I cook a lot more now, right?
Before I, you know, don't cook very much.
Now I've learned how to cook many different things, right?
And you know,
learned a lot about my kids, because I'm stuck with them 24 hours a day now.
Can't go anywhere without them, without seeing them or being within their radius.
And as I'm going through all these things, I learned that there's a lot of stuff that, like I said, that I have ways to grow, improvements to learn, things to know.
A lot of stuff I didn't know at the outset that I had to learn.
And I'm sure you guys might have that same experience.
It has been
a learning experience, a changing experience over one year.
You heard Willie talk about in the first half.
You had to learn everything about the school board politics in just one year, right?
So all of us has had different things like that.
And it's kind of frustrating sometimes because we all want to be smart, right?
We all think we want to know a lot of stuff.
And it's kind of painful to realize that there's a lot of stuff that we did not know, right?
Nowadays,
Being smart, having knowledge is considered to be a very prestigious thing.
It's like a big deal.
Kind of a change even in our lifetime, right?
We've seen this evolution where now the most hailed person is not the best athlete or the most famous movie star ever.
It's the smart guy, right?
Oh, we sure wish we were like Bill Gates, right?
Or Warren Buffett.
Oh, he's so smart, right?
He's the best investor, right?
Or these tech moguls.
They invented this thing.
Elon Musk, he made all these electric, whatever things, right?
We love that guy.
There are celebrities.
They're the people we look up to.
Knowledge is so...
Hailed as an important thing, right?
It's not just, oh, you're a nerd and you're smart, no one cares, right?
Now people actually care.
It's a big deal who is like the Jeopardy champion, right?
We had all these things, right, where people watching, oh, this guy's so smart.
He's so great.
And people in our lives, we know this too, because of that, we see a shift in the way people strive for academic knowledge, book knowledge, right?
Look at all.
The evolution of how, if you guys are parents and you have kids in high school, I see it how different it is compared to when people like me, when we were in high school, how much people care a lot more about, oh, I need to get ready for college.
I want to get to the best college.
I want to prove to everyone I'm the smartest guy, right?
I need to go to UC.
I need to go to
Stanford, Yale, Harvard, all these type of things, right?
These guys are like the pinnacle of what we want, right?
People worry about all the time.
How many SAT prep courses can I take, right?
How many AP classes can I take to boost my resume?
You know, my kids are only in elementary school.
Some of the parents I know are already talking to like, oh,
How can I get into good high school so that my kids can eventually get into good co- I said, that is like a decade away.
I'm not thinking about that.
But they are.
Why?
Because I want to make sure my kids get the best education, right?
I want to make sure they can learn and get the STEM knowledge, the whatever knowledge that they need to be successful in life.
And what's more, in life, we notice that people have in general gotten
more knowledge right knowledge has been thrust ahead because of technology we're getting more and more and more knowledge every day easier to access because we have stuff like this right where we can like oh if we have a question we can find the answer in a couple seconds right before we're talking about these jeopardy champions right before i was like wow they know all the answers
Well, today I can get all the same answers as a Jeopardy guy.
It just takes me longer than they do because I have to Google it up, right?
So I Google answer and I will also know every single answer to all the Jeopardy questions, right?
So more and more people are learning more and more things.
We're talking beginning like all the stuff I had to learn during the pandemic.
Where do I learn a lot of them?
Well, I just typed in the computer.
I did not know how to fix my toilet.
Oh, I watched some video online and now I am knowledgeable.
I can now fix my toilet, right?
I don't know how to cook this food item.
I watched the video.
Now I'm an expert chef.
I can cook that item.
You know, we see the pace is increasing just kind of like we would observe that, you know, because we're in general,
more educated than our parents' generation, right?
We'd say, oh, we know more than our parents, right?
I can't imagine how much more our kids are going to know more than us.
There's already stuff like computer stuff that they already know more than me, right?
My own kids.
Like we were talking about the salvation videos that Melvin and I and other people put together.
Some of those like advanced editing is actually not that advanced.
Some of it, my kids are already doing on their own, goofing around on their iPad, making a video and editing it and doing all these things, you know?
When I show Melvin the video, he's like, wow, this is like advanced editing, like fancy stuff.
I'm like, no, my kids are doing this.
They probably do it better than me, right?
So knowledge is expanding.
So the idea is that we think, oh, we're gonna get smarter, we're gonna do it better, we're gonna know everything.
But guess what?
We don't know everything.
And that's what we learned during this pandemic.
Like I said, I learned that there's a lot of stuff I did not know.
And we see it a lot from just talking to other people.
And let's talk specifically about this pandemic of all the things that people did not know or people thought they knew and said they knew, right?
Think back to March 2020, what people were saying about it and what they thought was the answer or the right thing or the wrong thing or whatever.
Back in,
April 2020, April 2020, I had a person tell me.
A person tell me when I was talking about, oh yeah, the pandemic's bad.
I'm staying home for a while just to see what happens, right?
I'll play it safe for now.
And I had someone tell me, Norman, that is the height of ignorance.
He told me this, this is the height of ignorance.
How can you buy into this hoax?
He told me it's all a hoax.
This is a pandemic.
No one is dying of this thing, right?
And I told him, you know what?
I hope you're right.
I really hope you're right and that I'm wrong and there's all the hoax and no one will die, right?
And we'll go back to normal.
And guess what?
That guy was 100% wrong because now we know that what happened over 500,000 people in the United States alone have already died, right?
So he thought he was really smart and he was lecturing me and telling me I'm an idiot.
He didn't know any better than me, right?
On the flip side, there are some catastrophe people, right?
Saying,
Oh, millions will die all everywhere, right?
And that, you know, be the most terrible, terrible, horrible, horrible things.
Well, those guys were kind of wrong too, right?
It didn't get into millions and millions.
Hundreds of thousands are still very bad, obviously, right?
But people did not know.
People did not know.
Look at the response we got from all our governments and whatever.
They were making it up all along, right?
They didn't know, right?
You had the smartest scientists.
What did they say?
Oh, you don't need to wear a mask.
Oh, now you do need to wear a mask.
Now you need to wear two masks, right?
You know, we try to figure it out as we go along.
It changes.
It's different.
We learn as people don't have knowledge, right?
They think they're smart.
You have people like all these like governors.
Oh, some of these governors said that I figured it out.
The pandemic's over.
We're going to open up our state and then let people run around.
What happened?
Oh, now there's a lot of virus in our state.
Oops, I was wrong, right?
Even our own governor, people said at the start, oh, this guy is so smart, right?
He did the right moves.
Fast forward one year later, people are trying to recall him saying, you did all the wrong moves.
So people think they're smart.
We don't know.
You know who does know?
God knows.
The problem maybe we have, the problem we have of not knowing stuff is maybe we aren't following God.
Because just what?
God knows better than we do.
God has all the answers.
So if we're saying our goal in life now is to be smarter, more knowledgeable, and all that kind of stuff, then we have to be smarter and more knowledgeable about God.
We don't know everything.
God does.
In John 3.20 it says this, For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart and knoweth all things.
God knows all things.
He knows the beginning to the end, right?
He knows everything in the past, everything in the future.
He knows everything in my mind and your mind.
There's not one fact that he doesn't know, right?
He knows all the mathematical equations.
He knows all the history of every country.
He knows all the science.
He created science after all.
You want knowledge?
You need God, the God that knows everything.
No one is smarter than God.
No one can beat God in the trivia challenge.
No one can beat God in figuring out the answers to X, Y, and Z.
You can't Google better than God, right?
There's no encyclopedia better than God.
It is God.
And what does God say when he wants us to be smart?
He focuses on one thing, one thing.
And that's what we read about these verses here in Proverbs.
And that is this word, wisdom, wisdom.
You want to be smart?
Wisdom, according to God, right?
Not book knowledge.
It's not about I have a PhD.
It's not about I have two PhDs and a master's and a this and a that.
It's not about I'm the Jeopardy Champion.
I've memorized all these 50 million facts.
I know the state capitals, the world capitals, the name of every president and vice president.
No.
It's do we have wisdom?
Proverbs 8 11 says this, for wisdom is better than rubies.
Wisdom ought to be our treasure.
We read in chapter two, right?
We also seek for it as we seek for silver and search for it as we search for hidden treasures.
We need wisdom.
Wisdom.
Now, what does wisdom mean?
We have some idea of what wisdom means if we know our base of vocabulary.
But this is something interesting.
If you look at the Hebrew, the Hebrew translation of wisdom says this.
It means skill in living.
skill and living.
I like that definition, right?
If you're wise, you have skill and living.
Because being smart is not just about knowing the facts.
Knowing the facts is meaningless if you're not using them for something good, right?
And what I do as an attorney, you know, I see a lot of attorneys that are Harvard law graduates and Yale graduates and they might know a lot of stuff.
They might know more stuff than me, but some of them are bad lawyers.
They're just bad even though I went to Harvard or whatever.
because they don't have that skill to put that knowledge to use, right?
That's the key, right?
You need that skill in living to put this knowledge to good use.
It doesn't matter if you know all these random equations or stuff and you memorize it, can you use this math to solve, you know, to be like an engineer and build something and make sure it has the right weight requirements or whatever, right?
That's the way most of the world works.
The person that does it best is one that actually uses that knowledge for some good.
So God wants us to learn how to do that, to have that kind of skill, that kind of skill.
And if we want to get that skill, we have to look first to God.
People are always looking the wrong places for this.
They think, if I only go to a better school, I will have more knowledge.
Not naturally to say true, right?
Not never true.
Like I said, like you could be like Harvard law graduate.
And that's not true.
It doesn't mean that you're the best guy or the number one guy, right?
It's not about going to the right school or people buy all these like books.
Oh, I can get it in the self-help book.
Maybe that's the answer.
Or now you go online.
I'm going to take a master class or watch the Ted Talk or whatever.
That's how you get the info.
No, no, no, no.
That's the wrong place to look for it.
What does the Bible say of where we look for it?
We look for it.
from God.
And it starts with what?
It starts with the fear of God.
The fear of God.
We read in verse 5 of chapter 2 here.
Then shout, thou understand the fear of the Lord.
And what?
And find the knowledge of God.
We want to have that knowledge that God has, right?
We want to have that same ability to know all the things that God knows.
How do we do it?
We need to have the fear of the Lord.
And that's how we find the knowledge.
And the famous Proverbs 1.7 verse says this, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, but fools despise wisdom and instruction.
Folks, the number one thing I would say to evaluate is a person smart or is a person dumb is do you fear God?
Do you fear God?
The person who fears God is smart
The person who doesn't fear God is dumb.
It's as simple as that.
If you fear God, what will you do?
You're going to fear his punishment.
You're going to fear the lake of fire.
You're going to fear hell.
So what's that smart decision you'll make knowing that?
You can say, I'm going to get saved.
I'm going to believe in Jesus Christ to take away my sins.
That's the smartest decision you could ever make.
What's the dumbest decision you can make?
The dumbest one is to say, I'm not scared of you, God.
I'm not scared of hell.
I'm not scared of the lake of fire.
I don't need to believe in you.
I don't need to believe in Jesus.
What's the result of that?
Everlasting damnation and eternity in hell.
Can you get any more dumb than that?
If you had to pick one everlasting happiness in heaven forever and ever everlasting damnation in hell forever and ever.
It's obvious, which is a smart choice.
The smart choice is to fear God.
A smart person would fear God.
A smart person will believe in God.
And when you fear God and you believe in God, you will follow God, right?
The idea is that your fear leads to a better understanding of how we need to listen.
It's like a parent and a child, right?
When a parent makes it clear to your kid, like, hey, you know you do something wrong, I'll punish you, right?
And so to do with my kids, right?
They know.
If they don't follow what I say, they might get yelled at.
They get punished.
They get this and that, bad consequences.
So what do they learn?
They learn, well, I better listen to you, right?
Same thing with God.
If we fear God, we're going to say, we're going to realize this.
God, we need to listen to you, not just on salvation, but on everything.
We need to take all your words and make them part of our lives to follow, to make it part of who we are.
A healthy fear of God leads to us
Following God more the more we fear God the more and more we want to do what's right by God because we're smart enough to realize We don't want that punishment.
We don't want God angry at us We want to love God instead just like a kid would love their parents.
I'm gonna love my parent I'm gonna follow them.
Oh, I'm gonna love my God and follow what my God says and Do what's right?
So we get the answers from God himself from God's word from God's word the Bible and
We need the Bible to guide us in our lives.
What's the smartest thing you can do?
Invest time in looking in the Bible to know more and more about what He has to guide our lives so we know better how to obey.
Folks, it's really simple.
If you don't know the Bible, then how can you say, I know how to follow God's Word?
It's really hard, isn't it?
You're just making stuff up.
The more we put ourselves in the Word, the more we put ourselves in fellowship with other Christians.
The more we put ourselves in Bible study, the more we put ourselves in prayer and fellowship with God, the more we see His will for us, the more we understand God's wisdom for us.
We get the answers.
We get enough to handle any situation, right?
You can look at the obvious ant stuff, right?
You can look at the Ten Commandments and say, oh, thou shalt not steal.
I guess I should not steal, right?
That's the easy one, right?
But a lot of people will say this.
Well, yeah, those are easy, but there's so much stuff that's not in the Bible, right?
There's stuff that's not written in the Bible.
How do we handle that?
How can you say God has the answers and God has the knowledge for stuff in the 21st century where things are so different from when the Bible is written?
Well, God gives us all the tools we need in the Bible to handle even 21st century life.
Proverbs 20, Proverbs 2, 10, 11 says this, When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul, when we have wisdom and knowledge in our soul, discretion shall preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee.
The way God handles all this and gives us all the answers is not spelling out every single little tiny detail in the Bible, but by giving, instead giving us discernment, discernment.
This is the big principle here we're talking about, right?
Discernment, in the general sense, means to be able to distinguish and separate stuff, right?
But for Christians, it's something more specific.
It's basically to decide, be able to decide what's the truth and what's error.
Right?
We were able to figure that out, right?
To be able to think based on our Biblical knowledge, to figure out all the things in life.
All the questions as they pop up, right?
Most famously, we heard about King Solomon, right?
Solomon was famous for being wise.
Now he wasn't wise because he had a book that gave him all the answers on a sheet of paper.
What did he pray for?
First Kings 3, 9.
He says, give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people that I may discern between good and bad.
He prayed for discernment, the ability to figure it out.
He was able to figure it out according to God's way.
And likewise, that's what we ought to do to answer all of life's question.
Give you a simple example.
A simple example, a person might say, what does the Bible say about something about marijuana and drugs?
The Bible doesn't say anything about it.
So the Bible doesn't say anything about it.
Can we smoke all the marijuana we want?
Shoot up on drugs, all we want?
Doesn't say no, right?
Well, this is where discernment comes in.
We figure this out.
We know the Bible says certain things about other stuff.
The Bible says you shouldn't get drunk, right?
Now let me ask you.
Is getting high on marijuana similar to getting drunk?
Say yes, right?
So we use our discernment, our biblical knowledge to kind of figure that out.
Right?
Do we just think about it?
Oh, we know that our body is a temple, right?
Do we want to pollute our temple with things like drugs and marijuana?
Does that make sense?
Do we think God wants that?
We use our knowledge, our discernment to figure it out and say, oh no, we don't want that, right?
And that's how we get to the answer.
The problem in our society today is that rather than filling our bodies and our heads with Bible knowledge and godly knowledge, we fill it with worldly knowledge.
and worldly things, and worldly culture, right?
Using that same example, if you ask the average, unsafe person about marijuana, what do they say today?
They say what?
We should legalize it, right?
Why?
Because what are they being fed in their culture?
You watch TV, you watch movies, what do you see?
Oh, marijuana, oh, they act a little crazier, whatever, but it's all in good fun, right?
That's just being fed into their heads all the time.
So the more and more they internalize that, why wouldn't they say, oh,
Let's vote to legalize marijuana.
All I know about it is that it seems not that bad, right?
Even though, any scientist would tell you, the more marijuana you smoke, the more damaging it is to your brain, right?
That's just scientific fact, right?
But people don't focus on that, right?
Don't focus on it.
There's no movie about the guy who smoked marijuana and then his life was ruined and now he's a homeless on the street living in poverty, right?
There's no movie like that, right?
There's nothing like that.
And the problem is, there's no movie that says, oh here's the guy that follows God's word.
And he listened to God's word, and he lived his life according to God's word, and look how happy he is, and look how successful he is, and all that kind of stuff.
You're not gonna get it anywhere else, folks.
You're gonna get it here in church, you're gonna get it from yourself when you read the Bible, you're gonna get it from your Christian friends.
That's the only way you're gonna get this knowledge.
But we have to internalize it.
to make it part of our lives, so that when we're faced with these decisions, we can discern to make those smart choices.
Because the more we know God, the more wisdom we have to make the right choices.
And that's for everything.
Everything, right?
No matter what it be.
Like, what job should I take?
What school should I go to?
Even the pandemic, right?
I would say this.
If people in charge of making these decisions, if they were all Christians,
And they were following God's word.
I bet you would have had a better result.
Why?
Because they would have looked at the Bible and they would think, well, how does my policy align with the Bible?
Right?
And they would know stuff like this.
They would know stuff like, oh, you need to love thy neighbor.
Right?
Love thy neighbor.
How can I care for my neighbor?
How can I keep my neighbor safe and healthy?
Protected from this virus.
How can I make policies that do that and said what do we have?
We have policies based on how can I get reelected?
How can I look good to the public right and you know make myself look smart, right and in say all these things So whatever it is, right?
That's why you get people going up there and saying this down the other thing because their focus isn't just oh brother I love you.
I want to care for you, right?
That's not their focus
That's not what they are ingrained in their mind, their worldview, their thinking.
That's gotta be our thinking.
That's how we make the smart choices, the right choices.
What is the right job I take?
Well, you think about it.
Which job is the one that God wants you to take?
What school should I go to?
I gotta accept the knowledge of colleges.
Which one?
You think about it in the godly sense, the biblical sense.
Which is the one that's best for my Christian walk?
Which is the one that encourages me, that helps me in my life?
All these things can be solved in God's word, even though he may not say it.
There's no word in the Bible that says, oh, this is how you make the COVID vaccine.
This is the recipe.
It's not in there, but God will show us the way, right?
God will show us the way and tell us to do the right thing.
So if it's things like, oh, you hear people now, should I take the vaccine or not, right?
Is it right?
Many Christians even saying this.
Folks, let the Bible be your guide, right?
Let the Bible be your guide.
Do you love your neighbor?
Do you care about not getting other people sick?
Will that give you your answer on should you take the vaccine?
I think the answer's obvious, right?
If you love your neighbor, if you care about people, you should, right?
That's simple answers, right?
People try to make it too complicated when they follow their own things.
I saw online the vaccine can do X, Y, and Z and mess you up or whatever.
That's not what the
That's not following Biblical principles, that's following whatever it said, some guy online, right?
Our discernment should be based on Biblical principles, first and foremost.
Alright, wrapping this up, as we're running low on time here, we have this quote, every man naturally desires knowledge, but what good is knowledge without the fear of God?
And that's what we said right at the outset, right?
We can know all the facts of man, but it's useless if we don't have skill in living, right?
The Bible teaches wisdom.
The most important thing is to have wisdom, skill, and living, applying that knowledge, applying that knowledge to live a better life.
All right, let's pray.
Dear God, we see in Proverbs here, you've taught us that you want us to be wise.
You know, everyone cares about being smart, right?
But do we care about being wise?
And if we are wise, what we need to do is to follow you, to fear you,
to have you as our guide in everything.
Lord, help us with that.
Help us be humbled to you to know that you know better than us.
You know more about everything in us.
You know about the pandemic, you know about everything.
Let's trust you God to guide us through everything.
And be with us as we continue to learn more and more about you and your work.
And pray all these things in Jesus' name, amen.
All right, so stay tuned for some announcements from Nathan right now.